h2. Highlights

This chapter presents an argument for the use of teaching routines (pedagogical patterns) to engage students in collaborative learning activities using the Group Scribbles classroom network technology. Teaching routines are a resource for structuring student opportunities to learn within lessons. They address known challenges associated with making the most of classroom network technology by scaffolding teacher enactment, enabling contingent teaching, and providing an anchor for expanding practice. In this chapter, we articulate the theoretical and empirical basis for using teaching routines to support diagnostic interactive formative assessment of student learning. We describe the goals and features of routines, types of collaboration instantiated in the routines, technological aspects of Group Scribbles, teachers’ perceived utility of the routines, and anticipated implementation challenges of the routines within lessons designed for middle school Earth science. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#1|p. 1]]

::teacher enactment - contingent teaching - teaching routines (patterns? scripts?):: [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#1|p. 1]]

To make the most of classroom network technologies, teachers need support for the design and enactment of classroom teaching strategies to use in conjunction with them. Our candidate for the form that support should take is what we call a . Teaching routines are recurring patterned sequences of interaction that teachers and students jointly enact to organize [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#1|p. 1]]

opportunities for student learning in classrooms. Routines are familiar features of classrooms, and remarkably stable and recognizable across large timescales and distances; they form part of the very “grammar of schooling” (Tyack & Cuban, 1995). Many routines are enacted principally through classroom discourse, as when teachers pose students a question whose answer is known to the students, students respond, and the teacher evaluates the response (Mehan, 1979). Classroom formats for organizing student participation in class, such as recitation, small group discussion, and whole-class discussion are ubiquitous and differ little in structure from subject to subject (Nystrand, Wu, & Gamoran, 2003). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

Technology readily facilitates re-use of learning processes (Koper, 2003; Schroeder & Spannagel, 2005; Zumbach, Muhlenbrock, Jansen, Reimann, & Hoppe, 2002), by providing a record of interaction that can be used as a guide for enacting processes again so that they can become routine sequences of interaction [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

With this technology, students can engage in participatory simulations and acts of collective representation that help them master difficult subject matter, from complex adaptive systems in biology to functions in algebra (Hegedus & Kaput, 2004; Stroup, Ares, & Hurford, 2005; Wilensky & Stroup, 2000). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

Collaborative Scripts and Design Patterns [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

The introduction of technology either to change the medium of learning (e.g., from face-to-face to online learning) or to augment face-to-face interaction may necessitate the development of new teaching routines and transformation of existing routines to make the most of new affordances of technology (Penuel, 2008; Roschelle, Knudsen, & Hegedus, in press). Designers of educational technologies have been aware of the need, potential, and limitations of designing sequences of interactions to better facilitate learning for some time. For example, recognizing that on their own, students may not collaborate effectively to learn together, designers have developed collaborative scripts that prescribe how students should form groups, interact, and approach problem solving (e.g., Hoppe & Ploetzner, 1999). Such scripts may facilitate collaboration, but they also have the potential to overly constrain learners’ efforts to collaborate to learn in certain situations (Dillenbourg, 2002). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

In an effort to help designers of collaborative, classroom network technologies ensure that technology supports a wide, rather than limited, number of ways learners can collaborate, other teams have sought to articulate sets of collaborative . The notion of a design pattern comes from the field of architecture, where the term refers to common features of well- designed spaces (Alexander, Ishikawa, & Silverstein, 1977). DiGiano and colleagues (2003) developed a set of collaborative design patterns to guide the design of software for emerging classroom network technology, such as networked graphing calculators. Their design patterns articulate different sequences of collaborative activity that could be used to organize learning opportunities across different subject areas. Their intent was to enable designers to think broadly [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#2|p. 2]]

about collaboration, not on the one hand to build in features that “over script” while at the same time supporting the kind of structuring of interaction that research suggests is optimal for individual and group learning. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#3|p. 3]]

In fact, many teachers do not use classroom network technologies in ways that promote discussion and reflection; not surprisingly, these teachers choose to use technologies less often than those who employ the technology in more powerful ways (Penuel, Boscardin, Masyn, & Crawford, 2007) [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#3|p. 3]]

One of the most common routines, the (initiation-response-evaluation) sequence in which teachers pose a question to students, students answer, and the teacher evaluates the response, offers little room for dialogue among students (Mehan, 1979; Wells, 1993). In science classrooms, the use of this sequence also limits opportunities for students to articulate complex concepts and arguments that are the hallmark of scientific reasoning (Lemke, 1990). Studies of K-12 teachers’ use of classroom network technologies indicate many teachers use I-R-E sequences with the technology, without much classroom discussion (e.g., Penuel, Boscardin, et al., 2007). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#3|p. 3]]

Particularly in scientific investigations, it can be difficult to help students connect what they are doing to the scientific question (Petrosino, 1998). Students’ conceptual development may depend on teachers’ providing explanations of phenomena and on learning from text (Klahr & Nigam, 2004), but students may not be motivated to learn from these sources. Classroom network technologies have the potential to help teachers track student progress and also keep students motivated and on task by responding to check-in or reflection questions, but teachers may not be aware of how to incorporate these kinds of procedures with the technologies. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#3|p. 3]]

One of the greatest challenges of teaching may be the need for teachers to make multiple decisions about what to do next during a single lesson based on their diagnoses of individuals’ and classes’ changing understanding of content (Hinds, 2002; Solomon & Morocco, 1999). On the fly, teachers must decide whether to provide feedback to all students or particular students. If feedback is appropriate, teachers need to determine when it should be provided and what form it should take (e.g., written, verbal). Not only are aggregating and interpreting data challenging for teachers who typically have limited training in analysis of assessment data and face multiple demands on their time, but support materials packaged with classroom network technologies and curricula rarely provide this type of “what if” guidance about what to do when students are having difficulty mastering a concept. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#3|p. 3]]

Depending on their role in the classroom, the grain- size of a teaching routine may vary from a small part of an instructional session (e.g., checking in about progress on a task) to spanning several days or weeks (e.g., an inquiry cycle beginning with identifying research questions, then testing hypotheses in investigations, analyzing results, drawing conclusions, and reflecting on what was learned). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#4|p. 4]]

A primary goal for teaching routines is to enhance student opportunities to communicate with the teacher and with peers about their thinking. makes it possible for teachers to pose questions to all students and thus to learn about the class’s state of knowledge. In addition, allows the cycle of question-and-answer to take place in a very short time, thereby providing students and teachers with rapid feedback without slowing the pace of teaching (Roschelle, Penuel, & Abrahamson, 2004). To make the most of network technologies, routines facilitate the design of classroom activities to create multiple opportunities for students to participate, both by contributing responses to student questions and by discussing their thinking with peers and the class. Routines enhance classroom communication by providing guidance about how to facilitate classroom conversations, structuring interactions among peers and small groups, and focusing discussions on epistemological ways of thinking within a domain [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#4|p. 4]]

Drawing upon the underlying components of the for guiding teaching with student response systems, as well as those of a similar method developed by the Physics Education Research Group at the University of Massachusetts (Dufresne & Gerace, 2004), routines provide useful scaffolds for teachers in orchestrating discussions. Researchers have observed that discussion based on the distribution of student responses encourages student thinking about alternative ways of addressing a concept or problem (Dufresne, Gerace, Leonard, Mestre, & Wenk, 1996) and aids in developing deeper student understanding of the meaning of concepts (Judson & Sawada, 2002). Explanation to a peer has the potential to transform students’ misconceptions (Judson & Sawada, 2002). Response systems facilitate discussion by providing an anchor (aggregate responses on a shared display) and a set of artifacts to which students can refer in the process of building knowledge (Truong, Griswold, Ratto, & Star, 2002). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#4|p. 4]]

Routines encourage dialogic, as opposed to monologic, forms of communication (Bakhtin, 1981; Holquist, 1990). occurs whenever teachers’ and students’ utterances anticipate and respond to one another, and where the course of a conversation cannot easily be predicted ahead of time. By contrast, “speaks with one voice,” often the teacher’s, and the speaker is not necessarily concerned with learning about the audience’s interests, concerns, or questions but rather with compelling them to be, do, or act in a particular way. When students have more opportunity to engage in genuine classroom dialogue rather than recitation, they learn more (Nystrand & Gamoran, 1991). Analyses of learning in science classrooms also highlight the potential of classroom conversations in which students shape the flow and direction of discussion. For example, van Zee and Minstrell (1997) demonstrate a model for orchestrating discussion in which the main goal is to elicit what students think, rather than to evaluate them, and in which subgoals of conversations emerge through particular conversational moves and are not dictated ahead of time by the teacher. These kinds of discussions facilitate students’ development of scientific explanations, as well as reflection and revision of ideas about subject matter (diSessa & Minstrell, 1998). Teaching routines may be useful in improving dialogic communication in the classroom, since at present, teachers do not use them widely and many find them more difficult to orchestrate than monologic forms of classroom communication. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#4|p. 4]]

While routines are not content- or domain-specific they are structured around important epistemological ways of thinking in a domain. In the case of science, these ways of thinking [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#4|p. 4]]

include designing questions, relating processes, and data creation. Because routines are designed to be applied in multiple instances within a curriculum, specific questions are not identified within a routine, but the steps of a routine are intended to inspire the design of diagnostic questions that will allow teachers to elicit deeper student reasoning. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#5|p. 5]]

is consistent with a growing body of cognitive science research that suggests it is necessary to engage rather than ignore problematic student ideas in order to promote conceptual change in science (diSessa & Minstrell, 1998; National Research Council, 1999; Posner, Strike, Hewson, & Gerzog, 1982; Smith, diSessa, & Roschelle, 1993-1994). The diagnostic approach, in its emphasis on eliciting student thinking, stands in contrast with the typical approach of science curricula and with the view of some advocates (e.g., Muthukrishna, Carnine, Grossen, & Miller, 1999) that focus solely on teaching correct concepts to students. To stimulate discussion, researchers have suggested that questions that yield divergent student responses are more effective than those that are easy or lead all students to a single answer (Beatty, Gerace, Leonard, & Dufresne, 2006). The timing of questions further shapes the nature of information an instructor gains about student understanding. Questions posed after a lecture or explanation can be used to check understanding (Dufresne, et al., 1996). Together, these findings suggest it matters not just what questions to ask but also when to ask them. Teaching routines explicitly address the kinds of questions that are appropriate for diagnosing student understanding as well as when they should be posed to students. As a result, teachers who use routines should be better equipped to address problematic student ideas within and across lessons. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#5|p. 5]]

An example of a routine that has as its primary goal motivating learning through feedback is a writing conference (Harris, 1986), in which a student presents a sample of original writing to a teacher or peer, gets feedback, and then revises their paper. The conference begins with an initial effort by the student—planning and producing a draft of his or her own creative or expository writing. Typically, it is the student who selects the topic and organizes the text; students rarely have more than a broad assignment from the teacher to constrain their creativity or imagination. The conference with the teacher or peer is an event where students get feedback, not to make a final judgment on their performance, but to motivate them to make changes to the text to make it clearer, more compelling, more engaging. Students are likely to be motivated to revise their writing on the basis of the conference, to the extent that they are motivated by a desire to write for an external audience, a desire that can be enhanced by the very act of the writing conference. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#5|p. 5]]

Classroom network technology can play an integral role in improving feedback, by making it easy for teachers to involve all students in assessment and making visible the range of student [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#5|p. 5]]

ideas at any point in a student’s learning trajectory (Roschelle, et al., 2004) [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#6|p. 6]]

Classroom network technologies are systems of technology in which individual devices for students and teachers are connected to a local, or classroom-based network; a mechanism to display contributions of students to the system is usually part of the technology (Penuel, in press). Research on this technology suggests its potential for dramatically increasing participation of students, facilitated by the ability to pose questions to all students simultaneously, aggregate results, and present them for all to see and discuss (Penuel, et al., 2005). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#6|p. 6]]

Routines of various kinds facilitate teachers’ becoming efficient in making instructional decisions on the fly (Calderhead, 1981). Routines can recommend alternative sequences of activities for teachers to follow, depending on how their students are learning from particular curriculum activities. If, furthermore, as a consequence of following a routine in which students have been given the opportunity to learn and are still having difficulty with a concept or skill, routines provide a basis for revising plans for future lessons. Routines can provide such information when they elicit the range of student ideas about a concept (van Zee & Minstrell, 1997), enable active student participation in assessment activities (Black & Wiliam, 1998; Dufresne, et al., 1996), and foster divergent thinking about particular problems (Beatty, et al., 2006; Stroup, et al., 2005). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#6|p. 6]]

::Interesting that they have a screenshot of GS running on a Mac, but on the download page, there is only a link to a PC version. Actually, it is running in the browser.:: [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#7|p. 7]]

Although Group Scribbles does not require teaching routines, the flexibility of this software provides an excellent occasion for their use. The teaching routines that we have developed help to scaffold for teachers sequences of instructional moves that promote discussion and reflection on [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#7|p. 7]]

student thinking and take advantage of the affordances of Group Scribbles. An outcome of our design process was a collection of seven teaching routines that provide a frame for teachers to enact different sequences of movement across public and private workspaces and between computer-mediated and face-to-face communication to make student thinking transparent. Each teaching routine describes a sequence of instructional moves for creating a particular kind of interactive formative assessment opportunity. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#8|p. 8]]

Our seven teaching routines support seven types of interactive formative assessments with Group Scribbles: concept mapping, data creating and sharing, question posing and categorizing, interpreting images, designing tests, and predicting. Each teaching routine follows a design principle aligned to how people learn (National Research Council, 1999) [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#8|p. 8]]

To facilitate formative interactions among the teacher and students, a teaching routine can encompass part of an instructional session or an entire instructional session. Some of the routines are particularly well suited for formatively assessing students’ inquiry skills (e.g., Group Data Creation and Comparison). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#8|p. 8]]

The final step in our process was to use the teaching routines to develop content-specific interactive formative assessments (IFAs) within lessons of a middle school Earth Systems science curriculum.. An IFA is a technology-supported formative assessment designed to promote student learning through the teacher’s use of diagnostic questioning and contingent teaching techniques. An IFA is a unique form of formative assessment because classroom network technology, in this case Group Scribbles, supports even greater collaboration and interaction among the teachers and students than are typically possible in classrooms. The adaptive assessment and instructional sequences in IFAs support the practices of eliciting student ideas and using feedback in formative ways to inform decisions about what to do next during instruction. All IFAs developed for this project adhere to four key principles, elaborated below. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#11|p. 11]]

IFAs build from existing curriculum materials. We have chosen to build assessments using a particular middle-school Earth science curriculum, Investigating Earth Systems, for a number of reasons. First, these materials are already widely adopted, and focused additions to the curriculum have a good chance at being incorporated into future editions of the curriculum. If that happens, the scalability of our materials is greatly enhanced. Second, these materials have been evaluated in an efficacy trial; when coupled with professional development that prepares teachers to adapt these materials to their local standards, the curriculum can be effective in increasing student learning in Earth science (Gallagher & Penuel, 2009). Third, the curriculum provides a useful anchor point for constraining development of both activities and assessments. Our aim is not to [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#11|p. 11]]

develop summative assessments but rather assessments that can be used to adjust instruction. Embedding them into materials teachers use to plan instruction provides the kind of guidance teachers can use to make the most of assessment information. IFAs incorporate routines. When assessments incorporate routines, they can serve as models for teacher adaptation and lesson creation. Incorporating the routines into assessments will make visible the versatility of routines as resources for development and will also provide concrete illustrations that reflect our best thinking about how assessments can be designed with the technologies. IFAs incorporate learning processes consistent with research on how students learn from participating in assessment activities in science. Key processes for learning from assessment in science activities are feedback and student reflection. Feedback helps students understand what they know and also to know how to improve (Black & Harrison, 2001; National Research Council, 2001). Network technology provides another source of feedback that may be important to learning: feedback on what others know and are having difficulty learning (Penuel, et al., 2005). Good classroom assessments also have students reflect on and revise their ideas (Black & Wiliam, 1998; National Research Council, 1999, 2001). Network technology supports reflection indirectly, by providing a focus (a shared display) for reflection, but to be effective, teachers must facilitate discussion of ideas to make reflection an integral part of a networked classrooms. The assessments will provide examples of how to foster reflection by providing more concrete guidance than do the teaching routines about questions to pose and about how to orchestrate classroom discussions. IFAs integrate diverse sources of expertise. Developing assessments that incorporate network technology, employ routines, and assess Earth science content and skills requires a diverse set of expertise. Software engineers are needed to clarify the current and possible capabilities of the technology and to support classroom implementation. Learning scientists are needed to develop lesson plans using routines that reflect what we know about how people learn. Assessment and subject matter experts are needed to develop diagnostic questions and see to it that the connections encouraged in the IFAs reflect both accurate and significant content. Teachers’ perspectives are needed to address questions about what is feasible to implement in real classrooms with students at particular grade levels. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#12|p. 12]]

In our work, each IFA has the same components as a teaching routine but is tailored to a lesson and its learning goals. Because IFAs are embedded within lessons and directly align with the target content of lessons, they can only be used with Group Scribbles in specified lesson contexts. For example, the Model-based Reasoning: Constructing a Model routine (Figure 3) was used to design an IFA within an Earth Systems lesson on tectonic plate boundaries (Table 2). In this way, a teaching routine becomes a resource for designing IFAs within lessons. As illustrated in Table 2, each step in the routine becomes instantiated within the Ring of Fire IFA. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#12|p. 12]]

In the Ring of Fire IFA, students explore an area in and around the Pacific Ocean, called the Ring of Fire, where large numbers of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur. This is due to the movement of the tectonic plates that exist in the area. The use of Group Scribbles as an interactive formative assessment space enables the teacher to “make thinking visible” by creating a public display of students’ contributions to a map of the Ring of Fire. In this IFA, students use the tools in Group Scribbles to show and label the locations of volcanoes, earthquakes and plates in the Ring of Fire. The Ring of Fire IFA assumes that students have had some prior exposure to content on developing and revising models, the structure of Earth’s interior, convection, and plate motion. This IFA is situated within an investigation in which students begin to explore relationships among events we observe on Earth’s surface (e.g., earthquakes and volcanoes) and plate tectonics. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#13|p. 13]]

To enact this IFA, the teacher needs access to the Group Scribbles server, a teacher computer with web browser, a projector connected to the teacher’s computer, and student computers with web browser and Group Scribbles. The teacher has teams of students conduct research on different aspects of the Ring of Fire (volcanoes, earthquakes, or plate boundaries). Teams use the internet and classroom text materials to research information regarding their assigned feature of the Ring of Fire. Each team creates a Group Scribbles board to showcase their learning. To facilitate discussion, the teacher can arrange the display to display multiple boards simultaneously. Examples of questions to promote discussion along with target responses are also included in the IFA, as shown in Table 2. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#13|p. 13]]

Teaching routines can be a powerful resource in supporting instructional planning and decision making during instruction. However, there are some important considerations to take into account in the design of teaching routines. Designing teaching routines The identification of which process should be represented in a teaching routine is of critical importance, particularly because routines are intended to be used repeatedly by teachers and students. Well-designed routines will reflect processes that are essential to student learning in the domain and will articulate steps for how students can engage in the process through collaboration. In the domain of science, inquiry skills such as designing an experiment or creating and using models are examples of important processes that should be considered as the basis for teaching routines. Although developing an infinite number of routines representing different processes may be possible, it is not ideal. Rather, it is preferable to develop a smaller set of routines that are focused on critical processes and that can be used repeatedly in classes to engage students in appropriate ways of learning in a domain. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#15|p. 15]]

When considering the steps that should be represented in a teaching routine, we caution against over-specification. To enhance the applicability and use of routines with different content, steps are best written at a general level that provide guidance to the teacher about what to do next but also allow some flexibility in how they can be implemented. In addition, when routines overly constrain student interactions they potentially reduce authentic cognitive and social engagement and student motivation that naturally occur as a result of collaboration (Dillenbourg, 2002). Designers of teaching routines must also attend to how classroom network technologies can be used to support student engagement in the steps of a routine. Particularly when teaching routines require collaboration, it is important that the technologies assist students in the types of communication and ways of thinking intended by the routine. When the technology is a poor fit, it may become a distraction for students and teachers. When the technology enhances students’ ability to communicate and collaborate, greater learning gains should be possible (Krajcik, 2001). Implementing teaching routines Implementing a teaching routine requires moving from the generic steps in the routine to an instantiation of a routine in a lesson or assessment, which involves tailoring the routine to incorporate specific content. Care needs to be taken that the steps in the routine are adequately addressed, the content of the lesson is appropriate for the routine, and routines are appropriate for supporting students in achieving the desired learning objectives. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#15|p. 15]]

In so far as teaching routines offer strategies to address complex interactions in the classroom, we view them as having great potential for professional development for teachers. We have conducted several workshops and teleconferences with teachers on teaching routines. A key feature of the professional development was to involve teachers as co-designers of IFAs with learning scientist researchers, assessment developers, and Earth scientists (Penuel, Roschelle, & Shechtman, 2007). The teachers involved in the design of these teaching routines were from the middle- and high-school in large urban school districts that include diverse student populations in terms of ethnicity and socio-economic status. The co-design process with teachers first involved the unpacking of the IFAs drafted by the project team. Through this process the relationships among the teaching routines and the [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#15|p. 15]]

components of the IFAs were made explicit. To complete drafts of new teaching routines and IFAs, small groups worked collaboratively. Each group was assigned a range of expertise: a learning expert, an Earth science content expert, a teacher, a technology specialist, and a researcher. Not only did this activity result in the creation of IFAs for others to use; the act of design also was intended to be a form of professional development for participating teachers. By providing teachers with access to diverse expertise, we hoped to extend the range of what teachers could imagine was possible with the technology and the curriculum. A key reason that we created teaching routines was to enable teachers to use them to design lessons on their own, as the need arises. The project’s vetted IFAs are likely to be only one source of inspiration for teachers in doing so. By reviewing and unpacking routines embedded in IFAs, our intent is to provide teachers with the tools they will need to make the most of Group Scribbles technology. We have planned a series of professional development sessions (workshops and teleconferences) to identify ways that teaching routines can be incorporated effectively into classroom activities and to obtain feedback on the teaching routines and IFAs. Routines, as a structure, are abstract. To master their use and application, teachers will need examples of concrete instantiations of each routine before they will be ready to design their own routine-based activities. To date, co-design teachers have reported that most teaching routines clearly articulate how the steps in the routines achieve the goals of enhancing communication, student participation and contingent teaching. In addition, teachers believe that the routines will help students learn high- level skills such as interpreting images, monitoring their understanding, designing experiments, and communicating specific information clearly. Several teachers predicted challenges related to classroom management, such as: (1) figuring out the “right amount of time” to allow students to answer questions, (2) keeping students on task during group work, (3) building in time for discussion and revision to each group’s ideas, and (4) managing responses from multiple groups/individuals. As is common in design efforts, we anticipated that multiple cycles of testing and refinement of teaching routines and IFAs would be necessary. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#16|p. 16]]

One of the most important contributions of this approach is that teaching routines make explicit good teaching practices with classroom network technology. In the past, teaching has been described as a profession where practice is “privatized,” that is, where instructional decisions are largely left to individual teachers to make and where opportunities to observe colleagues teach are limited (Little, 1990; Lortie, 1975). Both accountability systems and efforts to promote opportunities for teachers to learn from one another, however, aim to expand the horizon of visible practice and bring teachers’ practice into closer alignment to improve student learning (Little, 2002, 2003; O'Day, 2002). [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#17|p. 17]]

The process of making practice visible to peers is aided when teachers can develop a common language for describing their practice (Grossman & McDonald, 2008). In our work, that common language will be provided by teaching routines, and we expect it will serve not only as a resource for teachers to use to enable their own collaborative learning but also as a “boundary object” for anchoring discussions where researchers and teachers are both present and discussing how to improve a particular activity. As specifications of sequences of an IFA, teaching routines can also serve as a resource for instructional design. In developing curriculum or in planning instruction, individuals and teams benefit from models for how to structure resources and opportunities for student learning (Gallagher & Penuel, 2009). To the extent that these resources instantiate principles of how people learn, these routines also make it more likely that the lessons developed will promote student learning. For example, teaching routines that embed into their designs what have been called “quasi-repetitive activity cycles” have been shown to familiarize students with the process of learning from reflection (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy, & Bransford, 1999; Vye, et al., 1998). The first time students encounter demands for reflection, they may not know how to learn from collaborative reflection; by repeating cycles of learning and reflection, though, students gain experience in learning from revising their own ideas in conversation with others. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#17|p. 17]]

Alexander, C. N., Ishikawa, S., & Silverstein, M. (1977). A pattern language: Towns, buildings, construction. New York, N.Y: Oxford University Press. Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. Beatty, I. D., Gerace, W. J., Leonard, W. J., & Dufresne, R. J. (2006). Designing effective questions for classroom response system teaching. American Journal of Physics, 74(1), 31- 39. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#17|p. 17]]

Black, P., & Harrison, C. (2001). Feedback in questioning and marking: The science teacher's role in formative assessment. School Science Review, 82(301), 55-61. Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5(1), 7-74. Butler, R. (1987). Task-involving and ego-involving properties of evaluation: Effects of different feedback conditions on motivational perceptions, interest, and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(4), 474-482. Butler, R., & Nisan, M. (1986). Effects of no feedback, task-related comments, and grades on intrinsic motivation and performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78(3) 210-216. Calderhead, J. (1981). A psychological approach to research on teachers' classroom decision making. British Educational Research Journal, 7(1), 51-57. Davis, S. (2003). Observations in classrooms using a network of handheld devices. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 298-307. DiGiano, C., Yarnall, L., Patton, C., Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., & Manley, M. (2003). Conceptual tools for planning for the wireless classroom. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 284-297. Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with instructional design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61-91). Heerlen, Nederland: Open University of the Netherlands. diSessa, A. A., & Minstrell, J. (1998). Cultivating conceptual change with benchmark lessons. In J. G. Greeno & S. V. Goldman (Eds.), Thinking practices in mathematics and science learning (pp. 155-187). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Dufresne, R. J., & Gerace, W. J. (2004). Assessing-To-Learn: Formative assessment in physics instruction. The Physics Teacher, 42(7), 428-433. Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., Leonard, W. J., Mestre, J. P., & Wenk, L. (1996). Classtalk: A classroom communication system for active learning. Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 7(2), 3-47. Gallagher, L. P., & Penuel, W. R. (2009, April). Preparing teachers to design instruction in middle school Earth science: Impacts of three professional development programs on student learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Diego, CA. Grossman, P., & McDonald, M. (2008). Back to the future: Directions for research in teaching and teacher education. American Educational Research Journal, 45(1), 184-205. Harris, M. (1986). Teaching one-to-one: The writing conference. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. Hegedus, S. J., & Kaput, J. (2004, September). An introduction to the profound potential of connected algebra activities: Issues of representation, engagement and pedagogy. Paper presented at the 28th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Bergen, Norway. Hinds, M. (2002). Teaching as a clinical profession: A new challenge for education. New York, N.Y: Carnegie Corporation of New York. Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism. London UK: Routledge. Hoppe, U. H., & Ploetzner, R. (1999). Can analytic models support learning in groups? In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches (pp. 147-168). Oxford, UK: Elsevier. Judson, E., & Sawada, D. (2002). Learning from past and present: Electronic response systems in college lecture halls. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 21(2), 167-181. Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning paths in early science instruction: Effects of direct instruction and discovery learning. Psychological Science, 15(10), 661-667. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#18|p. 18]]

Koper, R. (2003). Combining reusable learning resources and services with pedagogical purposeful units of learning. In A. Littlejohn (Ed.), Reusing online resources: A sustainable approach to e-learning (pp. 46-59). London: Routledge. Krajcik, J. S. (2001). Supporting science learning in context: Project-based learning. In R. F. Tinker & J. S. Krajcik (Eds.), Portable technologies (pp. 7-28). New York, NY: Plenum Publishers. Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning, and values. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex. Little, J. W. (1990). The persistence of privacy: Autonomy and initiative in teachers' professional relations. Teachers College Record, 91(4) 508-536. Little, J. W. (2002). Locating learning in teachers' communities of practice: Opening up problems of analysis in records of everyday work. Teaching and Teacher Education, 18(8), 917-946. Little, J. W. (2003). Inside teacher community: Representations of classroom practice. Teachers College Record, 105(6), 913-945. Lortie, D. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago ILL: University of Chicago Press. Maehr, M. L., & Midgley, C. (1991). Enhancing student motivation: A school-wide approach. Educational Psychologist, 26(3-4), 399-427. Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Muthukrishna, N., Carnine, D., Grossen, B., & Miller, S. (1999). Children's alternative frameworks: Should they be directly addressed in science instruction? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(3), 233-248. National Research Council (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. National Research Council (2001). Classroom assessment and the National Science Education Standards. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Nystrand, M., & Gamoran, A. (1991). Instructional discourse, student engagement, and literature achievement. Research in the Teaching of English, 25(3) 261-290. Nystrand, M., Wu, L. L., & Gamoran, A. (2003). Questions in time: Investigating the structure and dynamics of unfolding classroom discourse. Discourse Processes, 32(5), 135-198. O'Day, J. A. (2002). Complexity, accountability, and school improvement. Harvard Educational Review, 72(3), 293-329. Penuel, W. R. (2008). Making the most of one-to-one computing in networked classrooms. In J. Voogt & G. Knezek (Eds.), International handbook of information technology in primary and secondary education (pp. 925-931). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer. Penuel, W. R. (in press). Classroom uses of technology to manage instruction International Encyclopedia of Education. Oxford, England: Elsevier. Penuel, W. R., Boscardin, C. K., Masyn, K., & Crawford, V. M. (2007). Teaching with student response systems in elementary and secondary education settings: A survey study. Educational Technology Research and Development, 55(4), 315-346. Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Abrahamson, A. L. (2005). Research on classroom networks for whole-class activities. Proceedings of the IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education (pp. 222-229). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE. Penuel, W. R., Roschelle, J., & Shechtman, N. (2007). The WHIRL co-design process: Participant experiences. Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning, 2(1), 51- 74. Petrosino, A. J. (1998). The use of reflection and revision in hands-on experimental activities by at risk children., Unpublished dissertation. Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. Posner, G., Strike, J., Hewson, P., & Gerzog, W. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66(2), 221-227. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#19|p. 19]]

Roschelle, J., Knudsen, J., & Hegedus, S. J. (in press). From new technological infrastructures to curricular activity systems: Advanced designs for teaching and learning. In M. J. Jacobson & P. Reimann (Eds.), Designs for learning environments of the future: International perspectives from the learning sciences. New York, NY: Springer. Roschelle, J., Penuel, W. R., & Abrahamson, A. L. (2004). The networked classroom. Educational Leadership, 61(5), 50-54. Schroeder, U., & Spannagel, C. (2005). The role of interaction records in active learning processes: Proceedings of the IADIS Virtual Multi Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems (MCCSIS) (pp. 99-104). Algarve, Portugal: International Association for Development of the Information Society. Schwartz, D. L., & Bransford, J. D. (1998). A time for telling. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 475-522. Schwartz, D. L., Lin, X., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J. D. (1999). Toward the development of flexibly adaptive instructional designs. In C. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 183-214). Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum. Smith, J. P., III, diSessa, A. A., & Roschelle, J. (1993-1994). Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(2), 115-163. Solomon, M. Z., & Morocco, C. (1999). The diagnostic teacher. In M. Z. Solomon (Ed.), The diagnostic teacher: Constructing new approaches to professional development (pp. 231-246). New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Stroup, W., Ares, N., & Hurford, A. (2005). A dialectic analysis of generativity: Issues of network supported design in mathematics and science. Journal of Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 7(3), 181-206. Truong, T. M., Griswold, W. G., Ratto, M., & Star, L. (2002). The ActiveClass project: experiments in encouraging classroom participation. San Diego, CA: University of California. Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward utopia: A century of public school reform. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. van Zee, E. H., & Minstrell, J. (1997). Using questioning to guide student thinking. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(2), 227-269. Vye, N., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J., Barron, B. J. S., Zech, L., & Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1998). SMART environments that support monitoring, reflection, and revision. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Wells, G. (1993). Reevaluating the IRF sequence: A proposal for the articulation of theories of activity and discourse for the analysis of teaching and learning in the classroom. Linguistics and Education, 5(1), 1-37. Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., & Rodriguez, D. (1998). The development of children's motivation in school contexts. Review of Research in Education, 23(1), 73-118. Wilensky, U., & Stroup, W. M. (2000, June). Networked gridlock: Students enacting complex dynamic phenomena with the HubNet architecture. Paper presented at the The Fourth Annual International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI. Zumbach, J., Muhlenbrock, M., Jansen, M., Reimann, P., & Hoppe, U. H. (2002). Multi- dimensional tracking in virtual learning teams: An exploratory study. In G. Stahl (Ed.), Computer support for collaborative learning: Foundations for a CSCL community (pp. 650- 651). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#20|p. 20]]

Black, P. (2003). The importance of everyday assessment. In J. M. Atkin & J. Coffee (Eds.), Everyday assessment in the science classroom (pp. 1-12). Arlington, VA: NSTA Press. Blumenfeld, P. C., Marx, R. W., & Harris, C. J. (2006). Learning environments. In W. Damon, R. M. Lerner, K. A. Renninger & I. E. Sigel (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Child psychology in practice (6th ed.) Vol. 4. (pp. 297-342). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Brecht, J., DiGiano, C., Patton, C., Tatar, D., Chaudhury, R., Roschelle, J., & Davis, K. (2006). Coordinating networked learning activities with a general-purpose interface. Proceedings of mLearn 2006, the 5th World Conference on Mobile Learning. Banff, Alberta, Canada. Borko, H. (2004). Professional development and teacher learning: mapping the terrain. Educational Researcher, 33(8), 3-15. Minstrell, J. (2001). Facets of students’ thinking: Designing to cross the gap from research to standards-based practice. In K. Crowley, C. D. Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for science: Implications for professional, instructional, and everyday science. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Minstrell, J., & Kraus, P. (2005). Guided inquiry in the science classroom. In National Research Council (Ed.), How students learn: History, mathematics, and science in the classroom (pp. 475-514). Washington, DC: National Academies Press. Minstrell, J., & van Zee, E. (2003). Using questioning to assess and foster student thinking. In J. M. Atkin & J. Coffee (Eds.), Everyday assessment in the science classroom (pp. 61-74). Arlington,VA: NSTA Press. Moraveji, N., Inkpen, K., Cutrell, E., Balakrishnan, R. (2009). A mischief of mice: Examining children’s performance in single display groupware systems with 1 to 32 mice. Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’09), 2157-2166. New York, NY: ACM. National Research Council (2007). Taking science to school: Learning and teaching science in grades K-8. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. Patton, C., Tatar, D., & Dimitriadis, Y. (2008). Trace theory, coordination games and GroupScribbles. In J. Voogt & G. Knezek (Eds.), International Handbook of Information Technology in Primary and Secondary Education, chapter on Emerging Technologies, 921- 934. New York: Springer. Pellegrino, J. W., Chudowsky, N., & Glaser, R. (2001). Knowing what students know: The science and design of educational assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Penuel, W. R., Lynn, E., & Berger, L. (2006). Classroom assessment with handheld computers. In M. van ‘t Hooft & K. Swan (Eds.), Ubiquitous computing in education: Invisible technology, visible impact (pp. 103-125). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Roschelle, J., Tatar, D., Chaudhury, S. R., Dimitriadis, Y., Patton, C., & DiGiano, C. (2007). Ink, improvisation, and interactive engagement: Learning with tablets. Computer, 40(9), 38-44. Sawyer, R. K. (Ed.). (2006). The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Shepard, L. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. Educational Researcher, 29(7), 4-14. [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#21|p. 21]]

Contingent teaching: adjusting instruction on the basis of particular patterns of student behaviour [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#21|p. 21]]

Diagnostic question: question designed to elicit student preconceptions and relate student responses to known goal or problematic understandings related to the domain [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#22|p. 22]]

Interactive formative assessment (IFA): a technology-supported formative assessment designed to promote student learning through the teacher’s use of diagnostic questioning and contingent teaching techniques [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#22|p. 22]]

Teaching routine: a recurring, patterned sequence of interaction teachers and students jointly enact to organize opportunities for student learning in classrooms [[skimx://debarger2010teaching#22|p. 22]]

