h1. Key ideas

h2. Literature review
Education studies in general, and SDL in particular, focus too much on K-12, and the framework of formal education

Including adult learners would be a good way to make the field advance, //"It can be argued that as research problems go, self-regulation would benefit greatly from the qualitatively rich contributions of articulate, self-reflective adult informants"//

Measuring learning effectiveness in terms of how well it conforms to predetermined, linear progression of concept acquisition. Students should learn what teacher is teaching... 

Case for grounded theory - if we believe something, we are likely to find it. 

Self-learners have to "take over" a number of strategies previously performed by teachers.  

h2. Study
15 adult graduate students asked to complete and analyze independent self-directed learning project, document in learning journal.

Given list of suggested readings about SDL, etc. to provide common conceptual framework for discussion of inner learning processes.

h2. Findings
h3. Transferability of skills
Many of the skills that students needed to gain to be successful in their self-learning project had transferable value to other endeavours, for example "maintaining disciplined rehearsal schedule".

::One of the key skills, and the biggest problem, with SDL is being self-disciplined, and finding enough time. This obviously transfers to success in a whole range of areas. How to train/foster this?::

h3. SDL = solitude?
Initially, students thought that SDL meant they had to do it all alone, and refused all help. Gradually realized that this was not the case - asked for outside help "with a vengeance". 

None sought collaboration of experts outside immediate social circle.

::Wonder if this would have been different today - or maybe just that we define the "immediate social circle" as much wider - including GPlus and Twitter networks, etc::

h3. Metaskills
Necessity of self-evaluation, criticality, stepping back and evaluating what you have done and how you should change it. Very useful.

Much SDL skills are transferable, but not all - learning always happens in a specific context.

h3. Controls
h4. Pedagogical control
What should be learned first (sequencing), what resources are useful, etc. 

Little effort on this by students, once main goal decided on, learning was more or less by chance. Sought assistance of person in their immediate surroundings possessing the skills and knowledge. 